---
title: 'CRediT where CRediT is due.'
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - academic-gadgets
---

Adding a CRediT statement to a manuscript is one of the most satisfying experiences - esepcially for those papers where you list of CRedit roles seems to be never ending. [I made a tool](https://tobicn.github.io/credit-author-tool/) to make that process a bit easier and to make sure that credit goes where credit is due.

Writing CRediT statements should be easier!
======

At the point, where you are in need of a CRediT statement, most likely you'll already have gone through writing your 8,000 word manuscript, formatting according to the wims and wishes of the journal, and gone back and forth in the GoogleDoc comments section with all your co-authors where and how to place that comma. Or, you completely forgot about it entirely, and are now at the point of submission and are trying to remember who did what and what does "Investigation", or "Conceptualization" actually mean again?

This little [CRediT Author Contribution Tool](https://tobicn.github.io/credit-author-tool/) is something I have been meaning to create for a long time. It was one of those things at the bottom of my to-do list, which never got the proper time and attention. And yes, I did Google and found a few other webistes that created the same thing or a version of it. Still, I quite like the structure and design of my tool, and, after all, none of the other sites have the names of my cats and my wife hidden in it.

It's definitely not earth-shattering. Still, I think it's one of those gadgets that's worth bookmarking for future use and may help you down the line.

What are CRediT roles?
----


